Under the Stars

Beyond the 4th Wall

Green Beings: VegFest ’26

Pride Weekend’s Grand Marshalls

Big Relief

Where’s a Slug to Eat?

The tastiest, most affordable food in the City on a Hill

One of the most important questions for every incoming UC Santa Cruz student is “What to eat?” Food is one of the biggest aspects of your college experience, acting as both a vessel for social interaction and a key ingredient in preparation for learning. Although tempting, the vast majority of students don’t have the financial means to sustain themselves with DoorDash or Uber Eats, and nobody wants to live off of hot ramen bowls. On-campus food sources then become your best option, and while each comes with its ups and downs, there are clear standouts amongst them. According to this current UC student, here are the top five on-campus grub spots:

(Can we get a small graphic of banana slugs to give them slugs instead of stars??))

Coming in 5th place is the College Nine/John R. Lewis Dining Hall ($14.55-$16.65, price decreased if spending UC currency). Located at the top of campus, the C9/JRL Dining Hall ranks highly in terms of architecture alone. With large glass walls providing views of the beautiful Santa Cruz woods and plenty of overflow seating, C9/JRL can accommodate large numbers of students without feeling cramped. This dining hall normally provides two distinct meal options for each time slot of the day, and is only a short uphill walk from the C9/JRL bus stop.

In 4th place is the Global Village Cafe. McHenry Library is the study spot on campus, and Global Village, located on the second floor, is a wonderful provider of study fuel. Their menu specializes in various artisanal toasts like the Club Avocado Toast ($7), which comes with fresh avocado, fire-braised chicken, bacon, and alfalfa sprouts, but I like to upgrade it into a sandwich and add pesto to the other slice of bread for a small fee. These toasts are a frequent choice of mine because they are filling but lean at the same time, so I don’t feel like I’m eating too many calories. Global Village also offers the standard cafe drink menu.

The 3rd spot goes to the Oakes Cafe. Located in the middle of the Oakes campus, it can be a little out of the way for some students, but it is definitely worth it for anybody who happens to be nearby. Oakes Cafe has the largest menu of the on-campus cafes, including a separate breakfast menu available till 11am. Highlights include the Manresa Breakfast Scramble (scrambled egg, potato, mushroom, onion, bell pepper, cheese, sour cream and fresh pico, $7.50) from the breakfast menu for those who enjoy fresh grilled vegetables and the Chipotle Chicken Bacon Sandwich (fire-braised chicken, pepper jack cheese, bacon, chipotle mayo, on a toasted telera roll, $8.99) from the standard one, which has a nice spice but I like to add a little more. One thing to stay aware of when visiting the Oakes Cafe is the mid-day lunch rush, as the line can get very backed up, and mistakes can be made when the staff gets overwhelmed.

The Bistro takes second place in the ranking. Located above the College Nine/John R. Lewis Dining Hall, the only thing keeping The Bistro from the top spot is the price. Considered the nicest spot to eat on campus, it makes a perfect special occasion meal or a fun treat for the friends of any student swindled into purchasing the Banana Slug Points Plan. Reservations are technically required, but you can slip in if you show up on a slow day! I recommend that first-timers try the Birria Pizza (beef birria, mozzarella, cilantro, onions, $16) because it combines salty and savory in a way that really complements each other, or the Gourmet Burger (half-pound certified angus beef chuck steak burger, smoked gouda, bacon jam, sriracha aioli, lettuce, tomato, red onion, pickle, with fries, $22) for a heartier meal that tastes fresh and juicy.

Before discussing the top spot, I’d like to include some honorable mentions. The Stevenson Coffee House is my personal favorite to visit. Its Hot Turkey Pesto Sandwich (sliced turkey, tomatoes, nut-free vegan basil pesto, smoked provolone, served on a roll) is my go-to. I am a sucker for its pesto, and it’s one of the only boba spots on campus. Banana Jo’s is the campus favorite for late-night eats, even though some are discouraged by the climb up Cardiac Hill to Crown and Merrill Colleges. The Merrill Market is also the best on campus, offering the widest selection of overpriced but convenient groceries. The Cowell/Stevenson Dining Hall ($14.55-16.65, price decreased if spending UC currency) has the most diverse salad bar, as well as an amazing view of East Field from its outdoor balcony seating, although the yellow jackets often have the same idea.

In first place, to no surprise of the current Santa Cruz students, is the Rachel Carson/Oakes Dining Hall ($14.55-16.65, price decreased if spending UC currency). Located only a short downhill walk from the Rachel Carson bus stop, the Rachel Carson/Oakes Dining Hall is the newest, grandest dining hall on campus. The salads can be a bit underwhelming, but this dining hall often has three distinct meal options for each time slot of the day, as well as the largest dessert bar and the highest quality of food. The hall itself is quite large, offering more than enough seating for students, as well as a choice between indoor and outdoor seating.

While I’d argue there are no incorrect choices regarding where you want to eat on campus, there are certainly better ones, and I hope this article can serve as a helpful resource for at least one lost first-year student.

Ben Ford is a UCSC sophomore in Bio-Chem who attended Aptos High School.

This article was published in the 2025 Student Guide, an insert in the Sept. 24 issue of Good Times. Click here to see the entire guide .